adds a new guide on mastering partitioned tables in TiDB (#21846)
pingcap/docs: tidb_partitioned_tables_guide.md

#### What Did We Test

To compare the performance of TTL and partition drop, we configured TTL to execute every 10 minutes and created a partitioned version of the same table, dropping one partition at the same interval for comparison. Both approaches were tested under background write loads of 50 and 100 concurrent threads. We measured key metrics such as execution time, system resource utilization, and the total number of rows deleted.

#### Findings

**TTL Performance:**
- On a high-write table, TTL runs every 10 minutes.
- With 50 threads, each TTL job took 8–10 minutes, deleting 7–11 million rows.
- With 100 threads, it handled up to 20 million rows, but execution time increased to 15–30 minutes, with greater variance.
- TTL jobs impacted system performance under high load due to extra scanning and deletion activity, reducing overall QPS.

**Partition Drop Performance:**
- DROP PARTITION removes an entire data segment instantly, with minimal resource usage.
- DROP PARTITION is a metadata-level operation, making it much faster and more predictable than TTL, especially when managing large volumes of historical data.

#### How to Use TTL and Partition Drop in TiDB

> In this experiment, the table structures have been anonymized. For more detailed information on the usage of TTL (Time To Live), please refer to the official documentation at https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/time-to-live/.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this experiment, the table structures have been anonymized. For more detailed information on the usage of [TTL (Time To Live)](/time-to-live.md).
```

## Introduction

Partitioned tables in TiDB offer a versatile approach to managing large datasets, improving query efficiency, facilitating bulk data deletion, and alleviating write hotspot issues. By dividing data into logical segments, TiDB can leverage **partition pruning** to skip irrelevant data during query execution, reducing resource consumption and accelerating performance—particularly in OLAP workloads with massive datasets.

A common use case is **range partitioning combined with local indexes**, which enables efficient historical data cleanup through operations like DROP PARTITION. This method not only removes obsolete data almost instantly but also retains high query efficiency when filtering by the partition key. However, after migrating from non-partitioned to partitioned tables, queries that cannot benefit from partition pruning—such as those lacking partition key filters—may experience degraded performance. In such cases, [**global indexes**](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/partitioned-table/#global-indexes) can be introduced to mitigate the performance impact by providing a unified index structure across all partitions.

> Another frequent scenario is using **hash or key partitioning** to address write hotspot issues, especially in workloads relying on AUTO_INCREMENT-style IDs where sequential inserts can overload specific TiKV regions. Distributing writes across partitions helps balance load, but similar to range partitioning, queries without partition-pruning conditions may suffer performance drawbacks—again, a situation where global indexes can help.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another frequent scenario is using **hash or key partitioning** to address write hotspot issues, especially in workloads relying on [AUTO_INCREMENT-style IDs](/auto_increment.md) where sequential inserts can overload specific TiKV regions. Distributing writes across partitions helps balance load, but similar to range partitioning, queries without partition-pruning conditions may suffer performance drawbacks—again, a situation where global indexes can help.
```

This document examines partitioned tables in TiDB from multiple angles, including query optimization, data cleanup, write scalability, and index management. Through detailed scenarios and best practices, it aims to equip you with the knowledge to make informed decisions about when and how to adopt partitioning strategies in your TiDB environment.

## Agenda

- Improving query efficiency
  - Partition pruning
  - Query performance comparison: Non-Partitioned Table vs. Local Index vs. Global Index
- Facilitating bulk data deletion
  - Data cleanup efficiency: TTL vs. Direct Partition Drop
  - Partition drop efficiency: Local Index vs Global Index
- Mitigating write hotspot issues
- Partition management challenge
  - How to avoid hotspots caused by new range partitions
- Converting between partitioned and non-partitioned tables

By understanding these aspects, you can make informed decisions on whether and how to implement partitioning in your TiDB environment.

> > **Note:** If you're new to partitioned tables in TiDB, we recommend reviewing the [Partitioned Table User Guide](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/partitioned-table) first to better understand key concepts like partition pruning, global vs. local indexes, and partition strategies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** If you're new to partitioned tables in TiDB, we recommend reviewing the [Partitioned Table User Guide](/partitioned-table.md) first to better understand key concepts like partition pruning, global vs. local indexes, and partition strategies.
```

Partition table with Global Index requires synchronous updates to the global index, potentially increasing significant execution time for DDL operations, such as DROP PARTITION, TRUNCATE PARTITION, or REORG PARTITION. In this section, the tests show that DROP PARTITION is much slower when using a **Global Index** compared to a **Local Index**. This should be considered when designing partitioned tables.

#### What Did We Test

We created a table with **366 partitions** and tested the DROP PARTITION performance using both **Global Index** and **Local Index**. The total number of rows was **1 billion**.

| Index Type | Duration (drop partition) |
|---|---|
| Global Index | 1 min 16.02 s |
| Local Index | 0.52 s |

#### Findings

Dropping a partition on a table with a Global Index took **76 seconds**, while the same operation with a Local Index took only **0.52 seconds**. The reason is that Global Indexes span all partitions and require more complex updates, while Local Indexes are limited to individual partitions and are easier to handle.

**Global Index**

```sql
mysql> alter table A drop partition A_2024363;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (1 min 16.02 sec)
```

**Local Index**

```sql

> mysql> alter table A drop partition A_2024363;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a partitioned table contains global indexes, performing certain DDL operations such as DROP PARTITION, TRUNCATE PARTITION, or REORG PARTITION requires synchronously updating the global index values. This can significantly increase the execution time of these DDL operations.
```

> ```sql
> mysql> alter table A drop partition A_2024363;
> Query OK, 0 rows affected (1 min 16.02 sec)
> ```
> 
> **Local Index**
> 
> ```sql
> mysql> alter table A drop partition A_2024363;
> Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.52 sec)
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sql
ALTER TABLE A DROP PARTITION A_2024363;
```

```
Query OK, 0 rows affected (1 min 16.02 sec)
```

**Local Index**

```sql
ALTER TABLE A DROP PARTITION A_2024363;
```

```
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.52 sec)
```
```

- Lower operational overhead.

**Cons:**
- Queries using **Point Get** or **Table Range Scan** will require **more table lookups**, which can degrade read performance for such query types.

**Recommendation:**
- Suitable for workloads where write scalability and operational ease are more critical than low-latency reads.

**Best Practices**

Create a partitioned table with SHARD_ROW_ID_BITS and PRE_SPLIT_REGIONS to pre-split table regions. The value of PRE_SPLIT_REGIONS must be less than or equal to that of SHARD_ROW_ID_BITS. The number of pre-split Regions for each partition is 2^(PRE_SPLIT_REGIONS).

```sql
CREATE TABLE employees (
  id INT NOT NULL,
  fname VARCHAR(30),
  lname VARCHAR(30),
  hired DATE NOT NULL DEFAULT '1970-01-01',
  separated DATE DEFAULT '9999-12-31',
  job_code INT,
  store_id INT,
  PRIMARY KEY (`id`,`hired`) NONCLUSTERED,
  KEY `idx_employees_on_store_id` (`store_id`)
)SHARD_ROW_ID_BITS = 2 PRE_SPLIT_REGIONS=2
PARTITION BY RANGE ( YEAR(hired) ) (
  PARTITION p0 VALUES LESS THAN (1991),
  PARTITION p1 VALUES LESS THAN (1996),
  PARTITION p2 VALUES LESS THAN (2001),
  PARTITION p3 VALUES LESS THAN (2006)
);
```

> Adding the [merge_option=deny](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/table-attributes/#control-the-region-merge-behavior-using-table-attributes) attribute to a table or partition can prevent the merging of empty regions. However, when a partition is dropped, the regions belonging to that partition will still be merged automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding the [merge_option=deny](/table-attributes.md#control-the-region-merge-behavior-using-table-attributes) attribute to a table or partition can prevent the merging of empty regions. However, when a partition is dropped, the regions belonging to that partition will still be merged automatically.
```

#### Applicable Scenarios

Partition pruning is most beneficial in scenarios where query predicates match the partitioning strategy. Common use cases include:

- **Time-series data queries**: When data is partitioned by time ranges (e.g., daily, monthly), queries restricted to a specific time period can quickly skip unrelated partitions.
- **Multi-tenant or category-based datasets**: Partitioning by tenant ID or category enables queries to focus on a small subset of partitions.
- **Hybrid Transactional/Analytical Processing (HTAP)**: Especially for range partitioning, TiDB can leverage partition pruning in analytical workloads on TiFlash to skip irrelevant partitions and scan only the necessary subset, preventing **full table scans** on large datasets.

For more use cases, please refer to https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/partition-pruning/

### Query Performance on Secondary Index: Non-Partitioned Table vs. Local Index vs. Global Index

> In TiDB, local indexes are the default indexing strategy for partitioned tables. Each partition maintains its own set of indexes, while a Global Index refers to an index that spans all partitions in a partitioned table. Unlike Local Indexes, which are partition-specific and stored separately within each partition, a Global Index maintains a single, unified index across the entire table. This index includes references to all rows, regardless of which partition they belong to, and thus can provide global queries and operations, such as joins or lookups, with faster access.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, I would just squeeze in a 'multiple' in and maybe rephrase to `... Global indexes can be faster for queries across multiple partitions because local indexes needs to do one lookup in each partition separately, while global index only needs one lookup for the whole table`

#### What Did We Test

We evaluated query performance across three table configurations in TiDB:
- Non-Partitioned Table
- Partitioned Table with Global Index
- Partitioned Table with Local Index

#### Test Setup

- The query **accesses data via a secondary index** and uses IN conditions across multiple values.
- The **partitioned table** had **366 partitions**, defined by **range partitioning on a datetime column**.
- Each matching key could return **multiple rows**, simulating a **high-volume OLTP-style query pattern**.
- We also evaluated the **impact of different partition counts** to understand how partition granularity influences latency and index performance.

#### Schema

```sql
CREATE TABLE `fa` (
  `id` bigint NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
  `account_id` bigint(20) NOT NULL,
  `sid` bigint(20) DEFAULT NULL,
  `user_id` bigint NOT NULL,

>   `yeardate` int NOT NULL,

Author: > I would use DATE instead, like `fa_date DATE NOT NULL`

Here is the customer’s schema. We did not make any changes; it has only been anonymized.

>   `yeardate` int NOT NULL,

Reviewer 2: The issue is that it makes it more complex, using `date` makes it simpler, as well as `yeardate` is really a concatenation of year + day of year in this example, which is a bit harder to understand, than simply `date` :)

>   PRIMARY KEY (`id`,`yeardate`) /*T![clustered_index] CLUSTERED */,

Author: Here is the customer’s schema. We did not make any changes; it has only been anonymized.

- For local indexes, if a query does not include effective partition pruning conditions, the number of partitions directly correlates with the number of RPCs triggered. This means more partitions will likely result in more RPCs, leading to higher latency.
- For global indexes, the number of RPCs and the degree of performance regression depend on both the number of partitions involved and how many rows need to be retrieved (i.e., the number of rows requiring table lookups).

#### Recommendation

- Avoid partitioned tables unless truly necessary. For most OLTP workloads, a well-indexed non-partitioned table performs better and is easier to manage.
- If you must use partitioned tables, benchmark both global index and local index strategies under your workload.
- Use global indexes when query performance across partitions is critical.
- Choose local indexes only if your main concern is DDL efficiency, such as fast DROP PARTITION, and the performance side effect from the partition table is acceptable.

## Facilitating Bulk Data Deletion

### Data Cleanup Efficiency: TTL vs. Direct Partition Drop

> In TiDB, historical data cleanup can be handled either by **TTL (Time-to-Live)** or **manual partition drop**. While both methods serve the same purpose, they differ significantly in performance. Our tests show that dropping partitions is generally faster and less resource-intensive, making it a better choice for large datasets and frequent purging needs.

Author: not yet because the performance of drop partiton with global index is much worse than local index

> Have you measured with Global indexes? With local indexes, the performance and resource usage is similar to DROP TABLE, more like metadata operation + compaction / removing empty regions And for Global indexes it will reorganize the index (see above), with the older batch type of DDL, (not the fast_ddl / ingest type).

Not yet, because dropping a partition with a global index performs much worse than with a local index.

  `version` int(11) DEFAULT NULL,
  `is_delete` tinyint(1) DEFAULT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (`session`, `ad_id`, `create_time`, `suffix`)
)
ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4 COLLATE=utf8mb4_bin
TTL=`expire_time` + INTERVAL 0 DAY TTL_ENABLE='ON'
TTL_JOB_INTERVAL='10m'
```

**Drop Partition (Range INTERVAL partitioning)**

```sql
CREATE TABLE `ad_cache` (
  `session_id` varchar(255) NOT NULL,
  `external_id` varbinary(255) NOT NULL,
  `create_time` datetime NOT NULL DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
  `id_suffix` bigint(20) NOT NULL,
  `expire_time` timestamp NULL DEFAULT NULL,
  `cache_data` mediumblob DEFAULT NULL,
  `data_version` int(11) DEFAULT NULL,
  `is_deleted` tinyint(1) DEFAULT NULL,
  PRIMARY KEY (
    `session_id`, `external_id`,
    `create_time`, `id_suffix`
  ) NONCLUSTERED
)
SHARD_ROW_ID_BITS=7
PRE_SPLIT_REGIONS=2
PARTITION BY RANGE COLUMNS (create_time)
INTERVAL (10 MINUTE)
FIRST PARTITION LESS THAN ('2025-02-19 18:00:00')
...
LAST PARTITION LESS THAN ('2025-02-19 20:00:00')
```

It's required to run DDL alter table partition ... to change the FIRST PARTITION and LAST PARTITION periodically. These two DDL statements can drop the old partitions and create new ones.

```sql

> ALTER TABLE ad_cache FIRST PARTITION LESS THAN ("${nextTimestamp}")

Author: > I think you mean `${newFirstTimestamp}` or `${dropDataOneIntervalBeforeThisDateTime}`? Maybe use both the DROP PARTITION command (in case the table does not conform to INTERVAL PARTITIONING) and the INTERVAL version? For both DROP and ADD?

https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/partitioned-table/?_gl=1*etb837*_gcl_au*MTIwNDgzMzk5My4xNzU2OTUzMDk5*_ga*MTEwNjc3NDY0MC4xNzE5OTIxMjYx*_ga_3JVXJ41175*czE3NjEwMTQ3MDEkbzQyJGcxJHQxNzYxMDE1MTI4JGo2MCRsMCRoMjE0NzQ2MjkxMw..*_ga_ZEL0RNV6R2*czE3NjEwMTQ3MDYkbzI1JGcxJHQxNzYxMDE1MTI4JGo1OCRsMCRoMA..#alter-interval-partitioned-tables

**Global Index**

```sql
mysql> alter table A drop partition A_2024363;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (1 min 16.02 sec)
```

**Local Index**

```sql
mysql> alter table A drop partition A_2024363;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.52 sec)
```

#### Recommendation

When a partitioned table contains global indexes, performing certain DDL operations such as DROP PARTITION, TRUNCATE PARTITION, or REORG PARTITION requires synchronously updating the global index values. This can significantly increase the execution time of these DDL operations.

If you need to drop partitions frequently and minimize the performance impact on the system, it's better to use **local indexes** for faster and more efficient operations.

## Mitigating Write Hotspot Issues

### Background

In TiDB, **write hotspots** occur when incoming write traffic is unevenly distributed across Regions.

This is common when the primary key is **monotonically increasing**—for example, an AUTO_INCREMENT primary key with AUTO_ID_CACHE=1, or secondary index on datetime column with default value set to CURRENT_TIMESTAMP—because new rows and index entries are always appended to the "rightmost" Region. Over time, this can lead to:

> - A single Region handling most of the write workload, while other Regions remain idle.

Author: > Data Range Region
I only found the documentation about “region.” Do you know who wrote the other related documents? [https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/tidb-storage/#region]

|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| NONCLUSTERED Partitioned | Low (with merge_option=deny) | Low (auto pre-split) | Low | Moderate (extra lookups) | Fast (DROP PARTITION) |
| CLUSTERED Partitioned | Medium (manual intervention) | Medium (manual split) | High | High (direct access) | Fast (DROP PARTITION) |
| CLUSTERED Non-partitioned | None | Medium (single table) | Low | High | Slow (DELETE/TTL) |

## Converting Between Partitioned and Non-Partitioned Tables

When working with large tables (e.g., 120 million rows), transforming between partitioned and non-partitioned schemas is sometimes required for performance tuning or schema design changes. TiDB supports several main approaches for such transformations:

1. Batch DML: `INSERT INTO ... SELECT ...`
2. Pipeline DML: `INSERT INTO ... SELECT ...`
3. Import into: `IMPORT INTO ... FROM SELECT ...`
4. Online DDL: Direct schema transformation via `ALTER TABLE`

This section compares the efficiency and implications of both methods in both directions of conversion, and provides best practice recommendations.

### Method 1: Batch DML INSERT INTO ... SELECT ...

**By Default**

```sql
SET tidb_mem_quota_query = 0;

> INSERT INTO fa_new SELECT * FROM fa;

Author: fa_new is the fa table with the partitioning removed. Do we need to show the schema?
